Slide 1
The OSI model is a 7 layer reference model that standardizes communications protocols, allowing interoperability across diverse networking systems.

The key benefits are -
Modularity - each layer handles specific functions
Troubleshooting - easier to debug and isolate problems
Structured Development - provides a framework to systems builders for designing complex protocols


Slide 2
Let’s look at the individual layers and what they do.
Slide 3
Application Layer
This is the end user layer of the OSI model. Client software applications such as web browsers and email clients use protocols at this layer to access network services.

Main Functions: User Interface

Example protocols: HTTP, FTP, SMTP, DNS

Slide 4
Presentation Layer
This is the layer that transforms data so that it is consumable by the application layer above it. Depending on the protocol, this layer is responsible for operations such as translation, encryption and compression. It allows interoperability across devices that may use different underlying data formats.

Main Functions - data encoding, compression, encryption

Examples -
Data Formatting - JSON, XML
Compression - JPG, PNG, MPEG
Encryption - SSL, TLS
Data Serialization - XDR, NDR, ASN.1

Slide 5
Session Layer
The session layer manages sessions (connections) between two communicating devices. This includes establishing, maintaining and closing connections.

Main Functions - Session management, checkpointing and synchronization

Example protocols - NetBIOS, RPC, PPTP


Slide 6
Transport Layer
This layer is responsible for end-to-end data delivery between two communicating devices. This layer performs several critical functions such as message segmentation, acknowledgement, re-delivery and traffic control.

Main Functions - Segmentation and re-assembly, flow control, error correction

Example protocols - TCP, UDP, SCTP



Slide 7
Network Layer
The network layer is responsible for the transmission of data across networks from the sender to the receiver. This layer takes data from the transport layer, re-assembles them into smaller units called packets and determines the best path to route the packets to their destination.

Main Functions - Routing, logical addressing

Example protocols - IP, ICMP, IGMP


Slide 8
Data Link Layer
This layer handles node-to-node delivery of data over a physical network link. This layer breaks packets into smaller pieces called data frames and ensures they are delivered to the next node. Switches, bridges and NICs are common networking devices that operate at this layer.

Main Functions - physical addressing, flow control (between nodes), error detection

Example protocols - Ethernet (IEEE 802.3), WiFi (IEEE 802.11), PPP

Slide 9
Physical Layer
This layer is concerned with the physical transmission of raw bits over a physical medium, such as cables, fiber optics and radio waves. Hubs, repeaters and modems operate at this layer.

Main Functions - bit transmission

Example protocols - IP, ICMP, IGMP



Reference-
https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ddos/glossary/open-systems-interconnection-model-osi/
